Once around the Glaton
meteorite. So on the 15th of May 1991 in
the village of Glaton just 15 km souths
southwest of Peterborough in the county
of Cambridge in England at 11:30 in the
morning. Although some reports say 12:30
but I think this may be a confusion. It
was May so we would have been on uh
daylight saving time so there would have
been an hour difference. So I think that
may account for that. There was a
meteorite which was a witnessed fall and
we've had quite a number of meteorites
over the UK in the last 100 years. On
average it works out roughly one every
10 years. Um but Glatten in 1991 you can
see the site circled there. There've
been a 30-year gap um after that one
before we got another one in Wincham.
Now, I've done a talk about the Wincha
meteorite separately. And you can also
see the Ashton meteorite, which is
another one that was fairly local to me,
and I've done a talk about that one, and
about the Barwell meteorite. So, I've
also visited the sites of both of
those. So, this one was a witnessed
fall, but it was witnessed by ear. Mr.
Pedifer, a retired civil servant, was in
his garden tending to his onions when he
heard a whistling noise and a
disturbance through the conifer hedge
followed by a thud on the ground. And on
investigation, he found the Glatin
meteorite, 767 g of it, buried into the
earth about 2 cm down, so not very deep.
And he picked it up and described it as
warm to the touch, which is interesting.
But no other pieces have been found.
There's just this one piece. A major
search was organized. And there is Mr.
Petor holding the uh very blackened face
of the rock towards the camera there.
And he said about it that he felt lucky
not to have been hit and in fact even
more lucky that it managed to miss his
greenhouse. Um it would have completely
wrecked the glass. I
suppose originally he thought that this
was a stone that had been thrown by uh
local
hooligans. But on feeling it and looking
at the surface and the blackened crust,
he actually realized what it might well
be and he decided to take it to some
experts who confirmed that what he had
there was indeed a meteorite.
So for a few months he kept it um and
protected it by wrapping it in this
plastic cling film that you can see
here, showing it off at the local
village fate every year and charging the
locals um a little bit of money to see
it and that money all went to charity.
But eventually he decided that he would
accept an offer of £250 for it from the
Natural History Museum. Now you can see
it in this photograph here where we can
see it side on with the blackened nose
which is the fusion crust where as that
leading edge came in through the
atmosphere at high speed it would have
melted the rock with the friction and
the rock has then flowed back over the
surface creating that modeled black
pattern over the nose and then you can
see the far end is shattered. There is a
white material exposed from the
interior. So, there must have been
another fragment of this somewhere. It's
just never been
found. Now that the scientists of the
Natural History Museum have had a chance
to get at it, they've taken a few small
pieces and this is a slice through one
of them and it's enabled them to
classify it as an L6 type condrite. So
condrite means that there are these
little round spheres of material inside
it that are formed in the original solar
nebula around the sun and then gradually
stuck together to build the larger space
rocks and build up into small baby
planets and even into larger planets
like the earth. But these were subject
to quite a lot of heat and pressure.
They're highly
metamorphosed and uh that suggests they
were buried deep inside the parent body
before it was then shattered and the
fragments came our
way. Now these L condrites as they're
known is L for low in iron and they
represent about 35% of all the
meteorites that we have on Earth. round
about 31,000 in total. And of that 35%,
60% of those are this L6 type that have
experienced this deep heat. Here's a
cross polar microscope view showing the
crystals deep within and uh a lot of
shattering of those crystals as well.
Probably as a result of the disruption
of the parent body. And this must have
been at least 100 km in diameter so that
it could trap enough heat within its
core to melt or partially melt and uh
change the structure of these uh deeper
buried
parts. But then it suffered a massive
collision and the parts were shattered
and thrown all over the solar system.
Many of them landing on the earth. And
we think that this dates back to what's
called the Flora family event about six
uh sorry 468 million years ago. A
planettoid around about 200 kilometers
across in the asteroid belt just beyond
Mars seems to have undergone a dramatic
cataclysmic collision shattering it into
very very many pieces. It created the
asteroid flora. That's about 57% of the
total. Ariadne at 9% OS and a whole lot
of other small ones. About 13,000 that
we know of have been tracked back to
coming from this event. And it's about
5% of all of the objects in the main
asteroid belt seem to be part of this
flora family.
And we know about this because a little
bit after the impact, so
467 12 million years ago, the amount of
meteorite material raining out of the
sky on Earth
skyrocketed. There's a dark line down
that cliff that you can see there about
a third of the way from the top. And
this is full of asteroid
dust, fragments of meteorites, and
they're all of this class El condrite.
So when they're dated, you get two
dates. You get one at 468 million years
ago and one right back to the dawn of
the solar system at uh 4.56
uh billion years ago. So one lot come
from one lot of dates is unmolested
material the condrites from the original
solar nebula dating back to
4.56 billion years ago and then the
others have undergone this metamorphos
and recristallized and as a result their
radioisometric clocks that to we used to
do the dating has been reset to 468
million years ago as a result of this uh
shattering and all this material raining
out onto the earth um brought with it a
period of darkness. We see fossilized
creatures. The picture at the top there
has got a meteorite and right across the
top there's the fossilized remains of a
nautilus. And uh these creatures were ab
abundant in the sea up to this point.
But we think that all of this
material, several thousand times more
than the normal amount of meteorites and
a lot of dust falling into the
atmosphere, caused global temperatures
to plummet, ice to advance from the uh
poles towards the equator, reflecting
more heat to space, accelerating the
cooling and creating a global ice age
with sea levels being dramatically
lowered and a lot of water locked up in
the glacias on the land, then the uh
temperature would drop enough that a lot
more water would freeze out of the
atmosphere due to the fact that water
vapor is a good greenhouse gas keeping
the planet warm. And so it would get
cooler and cooler for all these reasons.
And an awful lot of these creatures were
wiped out. It was a fairly substantial
mass extinction. And we think it's all
down to these L condrites. And here's an
example of a couple that were derived
from the Glatten meteorite. The one on
the left is 0.9 of a gram and that's
sold recently at auction for
£275. So more money than uh Mr. Pifer
got for the whole thing. And then
there's a piece that I spotted that was
for sale. Uh just 0.2 g partial slice.
Um again from Glatten there.
Now during the diamond jubilee
celebrations for um her majesty Queen
Elizabeth II, the Glatin meteorite took
a return visit to the village and was
taking pride of place sat on this desk
there being examined by a number of
people. Um so it went
home. So thank you very much for
listening. That was a very quick story
of the Glatten meteorite.